Thanks, Daniel. Thank you for that introduction. Good morning,
everyone. Happy to be here at PositConf and excited to talk to
you a little bit about some of the unspoken realities of a data
science career. So to start, since we're all data people, I
figured why not look at the data. So today I've pulled
together some highly researched data on what makes a person have
a successful and satisfied career. So this is my own
personal experience. For me, I'm more of an introvert. I don't
like asking questions if I don't have to. And I just much prefer
figuring things out on my own. So for example, I love escape
rooms, where you have to solve different puzzles to be able to
escape. And I'm the person that will look through every nook and
cranny in the room to try to figure out what's going on
before I asked for a hint. So for me, flying solo just comes
naturally. But I've learned I've been in industry just for over a
year, so I'm still new to my career. But I've had great
mentors, and I've been able to talk to lots of people and learn
better ways of navigating my data science career. And some of
them were unexpected to me that I didn't know coming out of
school what it would be like and there were some unexpected
realities. And so today I'm going to talk to you about three
of these, expanding your network, finding your niche and
advocating for yourself. So to start expanding your network,
and when I was in my first internship, I would hear the
word networking and I would cringe because I, like I said,
I'm more of an introvert and networking doesn't come easy to
me talking to different people about their career aspects and
career journeys was not something that was natural for
me. But expanding your network is so much more than that. It's
finding your people, it's finding resources in your
company, in the community that you can ask questions to that
can be there for for help. And also, it's about finding
friends, finding friends at work and finding those that you
really enjoy spending time with. And I learned this lesson at my
first internship. So I had an internship between the junior
and senior year of my undergrad, where I traveled across
the country, I really was excited to work on this project
and be a part of this intern program, where I was able to
actually start Shiny. So I learned how to do a Shiny app
and was really excited to dive into this and be able to produce
a good product for the company. So I really focused on that and
focused on learning this new skill and working on this
project. But there were so many other interns there that I was
able to meet. And there was one intern in particular that met
with me during the internship, that he asked me some questions
about my project about my career aspirations, what I was doing in
school, and just got to know me on a more personal level. Later
in the internship, we had our final presentations, and I went
to his and he talked about his project that he worked on, but
also all of the different people that he had met with over the
course of the internship, internship, both interns and
full time employees alike. He asked them questions like, what
do you like about your job? What do you not enjoy? What are
some career opportunities for me? Or what is your career
journey like? And he really was able to gain so many more
insights, I felt like and I really felt like I'd missed out
on an opportunity to really get more insights from the people
around me. And so a couple years later, I had another internship
between in the summer between my first and second year of grad
school. So I decided to try to prioritize more of my time in
this internship while working on my project, to also put time
into meeting others, and getting to know them and also asking
questions about what they do, what they like about their job.
And I talked to different data scientists, analysts,
biostatisticians around the around the organization, to
basically get some career advice for them and figure out if the
company was a good fit for me. And by the end of this
experience, I had gained so many resources around me that I was
able to say hi to people in the halls. And I was able to have
people to ask questions to and really, I actually ended up with
more friends from this internship, and more people that
I could keep in contact with. So how might you expand your
network? And for me, it comes down to setting little goals.
Maybe it's talking to someone in a coffee chat, maybe it's
virtual or in person, depending on your work style. But me
asking them about their career journey about what they like,
what they don't like about their jobs, and maybe just getting to
know each other on a personal level. You may attend an
after-work events or a social or join a club at work if there
are those or employee resource groups. For me, I've been very
fortunate enough to join an employee resource group at my
company and be on the committee for that group. So I've been
able to help organize events and get to know colleagues that I
wouldn't have been able to meet otherwise. And it's been an
enriching experience where I've had incredible opportunities
from it. Or if you don't have these opportunities at work, you
might find the online communities or groups to join.
And I mean, we're here at Posit.com, there are so many
different opportunities and groups that meet and so many
different ways to get to know others. And so this might be
another opportunity for you. But remember, it gets easier
every time you do it. So if you set a little goal to maybe do
one coffee chat a month or go to an event and talk to one new
person, every time you do it, it will get easier and it'll be
more natural for you to do. So the second point that I wanted
to talk about today is finding your niche. And this is finding
your passion, finding what you enjoy doing and what makes you
tick. And when I was thinking about this, I really like
basketball and the NBA. And in the NBA, there is a term called
the role player. So a team may have different role players that
do different aspects of the team. And so there could be
three point shooters, you could have a person that's very good
at defense, and the teams will have different roles to support
the superstars. So one ultimate role player that I can think of
is Draymond Green. And Draymond Green plays for the Golden State
Warriors, which I'm a Celtics fan. So it's not super fun to
talk about Draymond Green, but he is very, a very good example
of this where he really helps those around him score. And
really, his main niche is to be a vocal leader and an energizer
for the team. And so the team, the other players on the team
look to him for energy and for the leadership that they need.
And because of that, he's been a big part of the I believe four
championships in the last decade that the Golden State Warriors
have had. So what might be your niche? What could be the thing
that you're passionate about? And there's many different
things that it could be many different ideas. I only listed a
couple here. But one is you could be a subject matter
expert, there could be a topic in your industry that you're
very passionate about, or that you really want to learn more
about and dive into. You might be the only shiny person on your
team, or you really could be the only R person at your company.
There are many different ways of being a subject matter expert.
You might be the person that knows everyone that is able to
bring people together and help them collaborate and
communicate cross functionally. You might be the person that
really understands the end to end data workflow and people
come to you to know what data processes go with what and how
to navigate those different, different things. You might be
in a more of a managerial role where you do well in developing
the careers of others, and organizing teams and helping
them to collaborate well. But really, it comes down to what is
your passion? What do you enjoy doing? What is an area of your
work that you wish you could do more of day to day. And so your
niche may change over time. And that's okay. And it's important
to think of what sets you apart, what could you bring to
the table that's different from others on your team. And the
third point I wanted to talk about today is advocating for
yourself, being able to put yourself out there and sell
yourself, maybe sell the contributions that you're making
to the company. And for me, this is the most uncomfortable thing
to do. I don't enjoy talking about my accomplishments and
trying to push those out there and trying to put myself in
different areas where I may not feel as comfortable. But I do
know that it's important for my career development to at least
advocate for myself in the projects that I want to work on
in the career path that I want to go. And so it's important for
me to share that with others. So when I was in grad school, I
learned a little bit more about how to do this. And so my first
I was in a two year master's program. And in the first year
of that program, I had a year long career development course.
So we had a career coach that led us through lectures of resume
development of cover letters, interviewing, networking. And
one lesson we had was about negotiating. And so one thing
that she would always say is to know your worth, then ask for
it. So this had to do with salary negotiation, and not not
just salary negotiation, but also knowing your the benefits
that you want and knowing what other at least in my case,
knowing what other bio statisticians were making and,
and knowing your worth and being able to ask for it. But we can
also apply this same principle in advocating for yourself at
work. Know your worth, know what you are capable of not not just
knowing your worth, but it may be knowing your abilities or
knowing your aspirations, and then ask for it. Your manager
may not know everything that you're capable of all of the
different skills that you have. And they definitely probably
don't know all of your career aspirations where you want to
go. And it may be that you don't know yet. And so before you ask
for it, you have to figure out on your own what abilities you
have what what or what do you want to learn? And where do you
want to take your your different roles? Where do you want your
career to go? So once you know that, then you can ask for it.
So what are different things you might advocate for? I've kind of
alluded to this already, but maybe you advocate for a new
project, maybe there is something going on in a
different department at your work that you want to be a part
of. Or maybe there's a project that would help you learn a new
skill that you want to learn. And so you might advocate for a
new project, you might advocate for sharing your work, hashtag
open source, sharing what you've developed with, within
your team within your organization, or just in the
broader community. You might advocate for more
responsibility, maybe you reach the point that you feel like you
have a good grasp of what you're working on, you understand it
well. And you might advocate for more responsibility. On the
flip side, you might advocate for less responsibility if you
feel like you haven't been bogged down too much. And this
depends on the company, you might not be able to ask for
less responsibility. But you can advocate for yourself and what
you what you need. And one other idea is just to advocate
for personal development. You're all here at PositConf. So you're
getting personal development here. And you might advocate for
more of that, or more different aspects of that in your in your
work. So I've talked about a few different points here about
expanding your network, finding your niche, advocating for
yourself. And these can be difficult. And especially for
me, I've mentioned I'm an introvert. So a lot of these
have to do with working with people and cloud and
collaborating and communicating. And it may not be natural for
data science professionals to, to transition into these areas,
but they are important to what we want, what we want to
accomplish in our careers. So you might feel like me, and
especially after the PositConf, like this koala bear, where it's
it can be uncomfortable to talk to people and especially all day
and expanding your network and trying to accomplish all these
goals that you set for yourself. But the thing is just to set
little goals and see what you can do. And in the long run,
that's when you can look back and see what you've done. So I
want to return back to where we began, back to this highly
researched data that I presented to you at the
beginning, and try to see where it might go for you. Maybe in
your first year you advocate for yourself and you get onto this
new project where you learn a skill that later on you're able
to leverage in a future job interview or in a future project
at the same company. And then a few years later, you're about
five years in, you attend an after work social where you set
a goal for yourself that you're going to talk to one person
before you left that day. So you end up finding someone you talk
to them, and you find out that there is some overlap in your
projects and you have you have resources that you can share
between each other. And not only do you have this person that you
can turn to at your company for a resource, you also have ended
up making a lifelong friend. And then a few years later, maybe
10 years into your career, you are able to transition from a
data role to a project manager or subject matter expert role.
Because early on in your career, you decided that you really
wanted to learn about this specific topic in industry and
you became an expert on this idea. And it ended up years
later, being an inflection point for you to use that knowledge in
transitioning roles. So oftentimes, we won't know until
later on in our career that when we look back, there were these
different inflection points that led us to where we are today,
and to see where the career takes us. But it's about putting
in the little efforts now to see where it takes us. So as I was
thinking about what I would share today, and also thinking
back to when I was in school about what a data science career
would look like, I was thinking about the different technical
skills that I brought to the table. And I thought those
technical skills would be the most important thing that I
brought to a data science career. And while they're very
important, there's so much more to a data science career, and so
many things that were unexpected for me, that are very important
in where a career path takes us. And it all kind of came down to
the idea that it's not just about the data, it's also about
the people. Thank you.
All right, caught me off guard. All right, so we have time for
questions. Sure. Okay. All right. Question number one. How
do you balance your day to day tasks with work passion projects
that could benefit the company? And how do you prioritize time
for that?
That's a great question. I think for me, it's difficult because
there are certain projects that have to be done. I mean, there
are different deliverables that you can't just leave aside to
work on your work passion projects. And I think it's
important to keep those passions in mind, even when you can't
work on them. But it's also open. It's also good to have
open communication with your manager and what are you working
on? What do you want to be working on? So that they know
that the manager knows what you want to be doing. So that even
though if you don't have enough time to work on it now, they can
also, your manager can support you in what you want to do. And
so you can kind of set aside, it may not be all the time you want
to work on your work passion project now, but it might turn
into something more, especially if you're sharing what you're
developing, so that it is known.
All right, we have another question. Since you talked about
advocating for less responsibility, how would you do
that?
That's a great question, because I have not done that yet. That's
an excellent question. Honestly, I think it kind of comes back to
what I was saying in the last question. It's really about open
communication for me. I mean, I like I said, I can't really
answer this question, honestly, because I haven't done it. But
and in some cases, you might not be able to advocate it, you might
not be able to ask for less responsibility and haven't given
it to you. But having open communication with your manager
with your with those around you, I think can only help. So not
the best answer for that question. But that's my
thoughts.
All right, we have a couple of more. Also, because we have time.
Do you have any online resources for extending your data science
career?
Online resources? That's a great question. So I guess extending
your data science career is that this might be I think whenever I
hear that, I think of all of the technical skills that I could be
learning could be doing for extending my data science career.
Which was the exact opposite of what I just spoke about. And so
that's an interesting question. I think I don't know if I have
any specific resources per se, I think there's lots of different
websites that you can go to to learn more skills. But also, I
think kind of going along with what I was saying about
expanding your network is you I learned so much from the people
around me. And so learning from them going to I love going to
webinars and finding different like the data science hangout
that Rachel does. And some of the I think they're shiny
gatherings and some of those different online resources that
are more of interactive virtual virtual hangouts. I think I
learned the most from those and gain so many insights from the
people around me that it may not be something like different
articles that I read, but more just I learned so much from the
people that are that actually doing the data science.
All right. We'll have one more question. For those of us who
are in our later career stages or later in life. Do you have
any advice for them who are feel like they've sort of missed that
initial data science?
Yeah, I was actually going to mention something I forgot to
say that I don't think any of these any of these points that I
made apply only to early careers. I think you can start
any day. I think you can start today at PositConf. You can go
out and go to the lounge and talk to people there. You can
go just talk to the person sitting next to you at in the
different sessions and get to know them and and see feel free
to ask them questions about their career journey and about
what they like about their job. Maybe that'll lead you to find
something new that you didn't know about or find a new path
something some new topic that you want to look into. So yeah.
All right. That's time. So let's give Brendan another hand round
of applause. Thank you.